Data 3101 Syllabus
================
Elizabeth_Stregger
2024-08-16

# Data Acquisition and Organization (Fall 2024)

## Contact information:

Elizabeth Stregger  
Email: <estregger@mta.ca>  
Office: Library M13  
Office hours / help: by appointment  
Request an appointment:
<https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/LibraryAppointments@mta.ca/bookings/s/ChG4CXCnlUqxkSWnL40pJA2>

## Course description:

This course will build on MATH 1311 to cover high throughput acquisition
and management of data. The course will use diverse data types and
formats to illustrate conceptual challenges across disciplines.
Technical aspects will include evolving approaches to script-based web
scraping, file formats and conversions, data mergers and tidying,
metadata organization and capture. In parallel, the course will cover
theoretical and ethical aspects of data curation and access policies,
development of best practices for research data management and case
studies in secure management of sensitive or private data.

## Key resources (Open Access):

Bryan, J. (n.d.) Happy Git and GitHub for the useR.
<https://happygitwithr.com/index.html>
<https://rfortherestofus.com/2021/02/how-to-use-git-github-with-r/>

Thompson, E. by K., Hill, E., Carlisle-Johnston, E., Dennie, D., &
Fortin, É. (2023). *Research Data Management in the Canadian Context*.
Western University, Western Libraries.
<https://doi.org/10.5206/ZRUV7849>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). R for data
science: Import, tidy, transform, visualize, and model data (2nd
edition). O’Reilly Media, Inc. <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/>

## Learning objectives

At the end of the course, students are expected to be able to:

- Demonstrate in depth understanding of the principles, motivations and
  goals for reproducible, ethical, and open data

- Use Git for communication and reproducible version control

- Import and tidy diverse data sources across platforms

- Explore data to identify potential research questions or problems in
  the dataset  
  Identify best practices for research data management, including data
  organization, storage, security, sharing, and ethical re-use

- Demonstrate what they have learned about data acquisition, data
  organization, and data tools through self-reflection

# Course schedule (subject to change)

## Week 1 (Sep. 3 & 6)

#### Topics:

- Course Introduction

- Install-a-thon: R & Git Repository setup

#### Reading:

Bryan, J. (2018). Excuse Me, Do You Have a Moment to Talk About Version
Control? *The American Statistician*, *72*(1), 20–27.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1399928>

## Week 2 (Sep. 10 & 12)

#### Topics:

- Introduction to R & RStudio

- Research Data Management Overview

#### **Readings:**

Thompson, K. (2023). The Basics: An Introduction to Research Data
Management. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E. Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, &
É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data Management in the Canadian Context: A
Guide for Practitioners and Learners* (English). Western University,
Western Libraries. <https://doi.org/10.5206/OWNV1575>

Chapter 2: Workflow

#### **Assignment 1:**

- First push to GitHub (due Sep. 12)

## Week 3 (Sep. 17 & 19)

#### Topics:

- Data Transformation with DPLYR Part 1

- Data problems: Retraction Watch

#### Reading:

- Chapter 3: Data Transformation

#### Assignment 2:

- Deposit code from DPLYR live-coding (due Sep. 19)

## Week 4 (Sep. 24 & 26)

#### Topics:

- Data Transformation with DPLYR Part 2

- Code Style

- GitHub & R Follow-up

#### Assignment 3:

- Retraction Watch assignment (due Sep. 26)

#### Assignment 4:

- Update code from DPLYR live-coding, using styler (due Sep. 26)

## Week 5 (Oct. 1 & 3)

#### Topics:

- Data Tidying in R Part 1

- Data Tidying in R Part 2

#### Reading:

- Chapter 5

#### Assignment 5:

- Deposit code from Data Tidying in R live-coding sessions (due Oct.
  3)  

## Week 6 (Oct. 8 & 10)

#### Topics:

- Documentation & reproducibility workshop

- Data Acquisition in R (import, webscraping)

#### Reading / Talk:

- Guest lecture (outside of class time) - CEWIL

#### Assignment 6:

- Deposit code from Data Acquisition in R (due Oct. 10)

## Week 7 (Oct. 22 & 24)

#### Topics:

- Ungrading meetings

#### Reading / Talk:

- CEWIL / OA Week guest lecture (outside of class time)

## Week 8 (Oct. 29 & Oct. 31)

#### Topics:

- CEWIL Project: Introduction to metadata & XML

- CEWIL Project: AI and text as data

## Week 9 (Nov. 5 & Nov. 7)

#### Topics:

- CEWIL: AI and text as data continued

- CEWIL: Webscraping in R

#### Assignment 7:

- Metadata files (due Nov. 7)

## Week 10 (Nov. 12 & 14)

Reading Week - no class

## Week 11 (Nov. 19 & Nov. 22)

#### Topics:

- CEWIL project wrap-up

- Research Data Management: Part 2

#### Assignment 8:

- Working with AI and R Reflection (due Nov. 22)

## Week 12 (Nov. 26 & 28)

- Ungrading Meetings

# Course Policies

## Grading

Grades are extrinsic (external) motivators and often do not measure
student learning over time. Ungrading is a way to shift the focus away
from marks and towards increasing skills and understanding throughout
the term. I have designed this course with the flexibility for you to
continue learning and improving your work based on my feedback. This
feedback will the take the form of suggestions, questions, and resources
to guide your revision. This fits particularly well with the theme of
version control and documentation that runs through this course.

You will be asked to submit your code after participatory live coding in
the classroom. Once we have talked about documenting code and you have
developed more familiarity with R, you will have a chance to revise this
work.

You will be building a portfolio of your work in GitHub. We will meet
one-on-one partway through the term to talk about your learning goals
and progress in the class. I will provide questions to help you with
self-evaluation. We will work together to decide on a mid-term grade
based on your first draft work and a final grade based on your revised
work.

## Due dates

Due dates are included in the syllabus so that we can plan our work. You
do not need to tell me if your work will be late. However, any work
submitted later than 5 days after the due date will not be assessed in
time for you to receive feedback and continue to develop your work. It
is difficult to meet the course learning objectives if you habitually
submit work late.

## Recordings

This class will be held in person. However, if you are feeling unwell,
please stay home. Lectures will be recorded for accessibility and made
available through
[Teams](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3AI7TKF3BPoR70ajZFC7ebuO_hIpi9Op1kn0nUEXZhdVA1%40thread.tacv2/General?groupId=be497ae2-363d-4abf-9cc4-c1290d0fd2a9&tenantId=).

## Artificial Intelligence

In the 2024 Fall term, we will be using ChatGPT Team as part of a
Work-Integrated Learning project. We will be using ChatGPT Team to work
with text as structured data in weeks 8 and 9. The cost of this tool is
covered by a CEWIL grant.

## Names and pronouns

Elizabeth Stregger uses they and she pronouns. You can address me as
Elizabeth (preferred) or Mx. Stregger. If you let me know what pronouns
you use, I will strive to use them. I am also committed to pronouncing
your name properly. I might not get it right on the first try or all the
time. Please feel confident to correct me and I will work to improve.

# Important Mount Allison policies and resources:

Please contact me if you have questions about [Mount Allison’s Academic
Regulations](https://mta.ca/academic_calendar/24-25/_10.html) in the
context of this course, including Academic Calendar Section [10.6
Academic
Integrity](https://mta.ca/academic_calendar/24-25/_10.html#_10.6).

Students with permanent or temporary disabilities or medical conditions
may be eligible for accommodation through the [Meighen
Centre.](www.mta.ca/accesibility)

Mount Allison University’s [Wellness Centre](www.mta.ca/wellness) offers
free, confidential services to students. Services include mental health
support and primary healthcare. Several external resources are also
advertised through the Wellness Centre, many of which are free or
eligible for insurance coverage.
